# Potential Questions

## Question 1:How do rates of development in Seattle neighborhoods compare between Mandatory Housing Affordability (MHA) re-zoned neighborhoods and unaffected neighborhoods?

We plan to use data sets provided by Zillow and the city of Seattle Department of Construction and Inspection as well as the department of Planning and Community Development. We would interact with multiple data sets to be able to draw comparisons and contrasts between re-zoned and unaffected neighborhoods. We want to be able to inform future decisions made by the city - especially regarding the percentage of units required to be reserved for rent controlled housing and the square-footage fee.
We have prior knowledge about where development has been occurring and what the previous zoning laws have been. The development we can see is a large file from the Department of Construction and Inspection that provides the different permits that are issued as well as their locations and data about the particular permit. Zoning maps can give us information about the development capacity allowed at different locations around the city. Stakeholders in this project would be city staff, especially data and GIS specialists who provide us with data. Also Zillow can provide us with datasets with more research on housing that the city is perhaps not collecting.
Our analysis would involve using spatial tools, likely GIS, to add more information to the dataset with permits. We’d want to include which neighborhood the permitting is taking place within, as well as the zoning type that it falls within and if that zoning is a recent designation by the City of Seattle under Mandatory Housing Affordability (MHA). We’d then want to analyze the time in which permits are issued and how the implementation of new zoning correlates to possible changes in the rate of permit requests and issuance.
Knowing how rates of development are impacted by these new zoning laws will help lawmakers understand the impact of MHA policy. Does it induce or reduce development in neighborhoods? This is of high concern for the city. In each neighborhood they are considering two major factors - displacement risk and opportunity. For example, the Central District is considered high displacement risk and high opportunity due to the large proportion of renters and high access to transit, jobs, and amenities. Based whether a neighborhood is considered at a high or low level of either factor, they may want more or less requirements for affordable housing. The city’s choices will impact the citywide and neighborhood levels of displacement, density, and property values.
	
## Question 2: What amount of HFS’s food is considered ecologically sound, fair, humane, or local?

Within this project, we’ll be using data science to gain insight into the total amount of UW’s food that meets a certain criteria as a way to quantify ideas of ethical and sustainable purchasing. We know that the HFS Dining department purchased 16% food that met this criteria in 2013, additionally, we know that issues like seasonality, increased purchasing, shifting to a new food distributor, and a new corporate contract with Starbucks may influence a change in this figure. 
Key stakeholders for this project would be UW Housing and Food Services administrators, Husky Real Food Challenge students, and UW vendors. The relationship with Kara Carlson, the Dining Purchasing Director is especially crucial, as she communicates with the vendors who can provide purchasing data. 
A large challenge in this project is actually producing data, due to the amount of research that is sometimes necessary to determine if a food meets criteria. This process involves researching food items down to ingredients, sometimes even contacting vendors for our answers. To mitigate this challenge we’d be analyzing purchasing data to determine the lowest amount of data points necessary to infer what the total proportion of criteria-matching food is. 
This data will help UW decide what goals it may want to set for its food purchasing. Does it want to increase the amount of criteria-matching food? By knowing what the new proportion of food that does match, it is in a better position to make a choice on what percentage of fair, ecological, humane, or local food it wants to buy.


## Question 3: What specific factors are associated with the highest rates of property value increases in Seattle neighborhoods?

To answer this question, we will be using the Zillow economic research dataset and public government data, such as GIS files from Seattle Department of Construction and Inspection. Through this, we will aim to find relatable data that can be used to answer our question. Knowing what factors drive property values can serve parties of a variety of interests. We’re more interested in interventions from city government and nonprofits to decrease cost of living, rather than private developers hoping to maximize their investments.
We can assume that there is a relationship between improvements and square footage with value of a parcel. Additionally, amenities like water, transit, schools, work location, and commercial districts correlate to higher value. Stakeholders we’d be engaging with in this project would be Zillow and City of Seattle staff for data requests.
Our analysis would be to create as comprehensive as possible a dataset of parcels, their price, and values representing things like transit access, neighborhood density, schools, park access, commercial development, and other factors that possibly influence property value. We can then statistically analyze the relationship between the values of these various factors and the price of properties over time.
Knowing which factors are associated with  increased property values can be a crucial element in Seattle’s approach to mitigating economic displacement. Using this information they can make interventions if such factors are increasing in neighborhoods with high proportions of renters which can lead to less displacement. This may be difficult however if we find that these factors that lead to increasing property value are also goals the city wants to pursue, like better infrastructure, access to jobs, etc.
